https.rst, before:

Configure https
===============

Having got your installation up and running using unencrypted connections,
you probably want to go straight on and re-configure it to use https.
Increasingly the web is moving to using encrypted connections only, and
it's worth doing.

Let's Encrypt
-------------

In order to make use of encrypted connections, your web server will need
a digital certificate.  Your organisation may already have a supplier
for such certificates, but if not then you can get them free from the
`Let's Encrypt <https://letsencrypt.org/>`_ project.  The following
instructions assume you're going to use Let's Encrypt.

Install Certbot
---------------

The process of getting a certificate from Let's Encrypt is enabled by
a utility called certbot.  This is included in Debian GNU/Linux.

To install it execute the following command:

::

  $ sudo apt install certbot python-certbot-nginx


Request a certificate
---------------------

You should already have Nginx installed and running on your system
and accessible from the outside world, albeit only over http.  Before
Let's Encrypt will issue you with a certificate, they need to be
satisfied that you are actually have control of the machine making the
request, so their server will need to be able to contact yours to
validate the request.

Happily the whole process is pretty thoroughly automated.  You run a
command on your server, it contacts LetsEncrypt's servers, they make
a request back to your Nginx instance to make sure it really is you
and then the certificate is issued.  The utility even installs it for
you.

The command to use is:

::

  $ sudo certbot --nginx

You will be prompted for an e-mail address (so the certificate issuing
authority can contact you if one of your certificates hasn't been
renewed and is about to expire) and then to accept LetsEncrypt's terms
of service.

The utility will work out your configured domain name from the
Nginx configuration file which you set up earlier and then offer to
re-direct all requests to https only.  Take this option (option 2)
and it will modify the Nginx configuration file for your website
as needed.

Once the utility has finished you should find that any attempt to
access http://scheduler.myschool.org.uk (or whatever your site is
called) is automatically redirected to https://scheduler.myschool.org.uk.

The utility also sets up a background job which will automatically renew
the certificate before it expires.

Commit message:

Add Azure as authentication mechanism

https.rst, after:

Configure https
===============

Having got your installation up and running using unencrypted connections,
you now need to configure https.  Running an unencrypted web server is
frowned upon, and the authentication services generally won't let
you use them for authentication if you are.

Let's Encrypt
-------------

In order to make use of encrypted connections, your web server will need
a digital certificate.  Your organisation may already have a supplier
for such certificates, but if not then you can get them free from the
`Let's Encrypt <https://letsencrypt.org/>`_ project.  The following
instructions assume you're going to use Let's Encrypt.

Install Certbot
---------------

The process of getting a certificate from Let's Encrypt is enabled by
a utility called certbot.  This is included in Debian GNU/Linux.

To install it execute the following command:

::

  $ sudo apt install certbot python-certbot-nginx


Request a certificate
---------------------

You should already have Nginx installed and running on your system
and accessible from the outside world, albeit only over http.  Before
Let's Encrypt will issue you with a certificate, they need to be
satisfied that you are actually have control of the machine making the
request, so their server will need to be able to contact yours to
validate the request.

Happily the whole process is pretty thoroughly automated.  You run a
command on your server, it contacts LetsEncrypt's servers, they make
a request back to your Nginx instance to make sure it really is you
and then the certificate is issued.  The utility even installs it for
you.

The command to use is:

::

  $ sudo certbot --nginx

You will be prompted for an e-mail address (so the certificate issuing
authority can contact you if one of your certificates hasn't been
renewed and is about to expire) and then to accept LetsEncrypt's terms
of service.

The utility will work out your configured domain name from the
Nginx configuration file which you set up earlier and then offer to
re-direct all requests to https only.  Take this option (option 2)
and it will modify the Nginx configuration file for your website
as needed.

Once the utility has finished you should find that any attempt to
access http://scheduler.myschool.org.uk (or whatever your site is
called) is automatically redirected to https://scheduler.myschool.org.uk.

The utility also sets up a background job which will automatically renew
the certificate before it expires.
