mysql.rst, before:

MySQL
=====

Currently the application uses MySQL as its database server, so install MySQL.
The steps needed to do this depend on whether you are using version 8
or version 9 of Debian GNU/Linux.

Debian 9 - Stretch
------------------

A couple of extra steps are needed in order to configure your system
to pick up actual packages for MySQL.

.. warning::

  Do not install the packages called "mysql..." from Debian itself.
  Despite the names, they will give you MariaDB, which has enough
  differences from MySQL to make it unsuitable.

Download the mysql-apt-config deb file from
`MySQL's community website <https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/repo/apt/>`_
and install it with:

::

  $ wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql-apt-config_0.8.9-1_all.deb
  $ sudo dpkg -i mysql-apt-config_0.8.9-1_all.deb
  $ sudo apt-get update
  $ sudo apt-get install mysql-server mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev

Check the above web page first to see whether this is still the current
version of the mysql-apt-config package.

When you install this package you will be asked what MySQL packages you
want to install - just take the default option.


Debian 8 - Jessie
-----------------

::

  $ sudo apt-get install mysql-server mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev

During the installation, you will be prompted for a password for the
MySQL root user.  Make this something different from both your user's
password and the system root password.  Save it carefully, because you
will need it later.

Commit message:

Add specific MySql version for stretch.

mysql.rst, after:

MySQL
=====

Currently the application uses MySQL as its database server, so install MySQL.
The steps needed to do this depend on whether you are using version 8
or version 9 of Debian GNU/Linux.

Debian 9 - Stretch
------------------

A couple of extra steps are needed in order to configure your system
to pick up actual packages for MySQL.

.. warning::

  Do not install the packages called "mysql..." from Debian itself.
  Despite the names, they will give you MariaDB, which has enough
  differences from MySQL to make it unsuitable.

Download the mysql-apt-config deb file from
`MySQL's community website <https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/repo/apt/>`_
and install it with:

::

  $ wget https://dev.mysql.com/get/mysql-apt-config_0.8.9-1_all.deb
  $ sudo dpkg -i mysql-apt-config_0.8.11-1_all.deb
  $ sudo apt-get update
  $ sudo apt-get install mysql-server mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev

Check the above web page first to see whether this is still the current
version of the mysql-apt-config package.

When you install this package you will be asked what MySQL packages you
want to install - make sure you install version 5.7 and not the the
default version 8.0.  The later version introduces incompatibilities
which will prevent the rest of the installation from running smoothly.


Debian 8 - Jessie
-----------------

::

  $ sudo apt-get install mysql-server mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev

During the installation, you will be prompted for a password for the
MySQL root user.  Make this something different from both your user's
password and the system root password.  Save it carefully, because you
will need it later.
