scheduler.rst, before:

Scheduler
=========

Now you've set up all the necessary pre-requisites, you can install
the Scheduler application itself.

.. note::

  There is nothing to stop you fetching the Scheduler code first if you
  just want to have a look at the source etc.  You won't however be
  able to run the application (or do the "bundle install" step below)
  until you have all the pre-requisites in place.


Download
--------

The Scheduler source code resides on
`Github <https://github.com/>`_.

Before you download it, think about where you're going to put the files
in your user's home directory.  All the development work is done using
a directory name of:

  ~/Work/Coding/scheduler

so unless you have a good reason not to, that might be a good place
for it.

::

  $ cd
  $ mkdir -p Work/Coding
  $ cd Work/Coding
  $ git clone https://github.com/XronosSchedulingLtd/scheduler.git
  $ cd scheduler
  $ gem install bundler
  $ bundle install

These commands create the necessary directory structure, fetch the
application files from Github, and then finally fetch and install
the necessary support software.

There's an interesting bootstrap problem.  All the necessary support
packages are listed in a file called Gemfile.lock within the scheduler
directory.  One of these support packages is called "bundler", but that
package needs to be installed in order to be able to use it to install
all the others.  Hence we manually install the bundler gem, then use it
to install the rest.


Create database
---------------

Before you can run up the application, you need some databases to
be created within MySQL/MariaDB.  A script is provided to assist
in setting these up.  Under the scheduler directory it will be
found as:

  support/setupmysql

Edit the script and you will see two environment variables to set.

::

  DATABASE_PREFIX="not set"
  DATABASE_PASSWORD="not set"

The prefix which you use will depend on your database, but if this
is a new system just for running Scheduler then an obvious one to
use would be just "scheduler".  The password is up to you - make it
something secure.  Then run the script with

::

  $ support/setupmysql

You will be prompted for the MySQL root password which you set up
earlier when installing MySQL.

Edit the file:

  config/database.yml

and set the password there to the same as you chose to put in the
DATABASE_PASSWORD variable.

You can then create the database tables and give them some initial
sample data with the following commands.

::

  $ rake db:schema:load
  $ rake db:seed


Run it
------

And now you should be in a position to run up the application in
demonstration mode with the following command:

::

  $ rails s

Point a web browser to http://<your host>:3000 and you should see
the Scheduler demonstration site.  The application is running in development
mode with a copy of the data used on the demonstration site.

You can log in as one of the two demonstration users using the menu
at the top right.

Commit message:

Add instruction for listening on all interfaces.

scheduler.rst, after:

Scheduler
=========

Now you've set up all the necessary pre-requisites, you can install
the Scheduler application itself.

.. note::

  There is nothing to stop you fetching the Scheduler code first if you
  just want to have a look at the source etc.  You won't however be
  able to run the application (or do the "bundle install" step below)
  until you have all the pre-requisites in place.


Download
--------

The Scheduler source code resides on
`Github <https://github.com/>`_.

Before you download it, think about where you're going to put the files
in your user's home directory.  All the development work is done using
a directory name of:

  ~/Work/Coding/scheduler

so unless you have a good reason not to, that might be a good place
for it.

::

  $ cd
  $ mkdir -p Work/Coding
  $ cd Work/Coding
  $ git clone https://github.com/XronosSchedulingLtd/scheduler.git
  $ cd scheduler
  $ gem install bundler
  $ bundle install

These commands create the necessary directory structure, fetch the
application files from Github, and then finally fetch and install
the necessary support software.

There's an interesting bootstrap problem.  All the necessary support
packages are listed in a file called Gemfile.lock within the scheduler
directory.  One of these support packages is called "bundler", but that
package needs to be installed in order to be able to use it to install
all the others.  Hence we manually install the bundler gem, then use it
to install the rest.


Create database
---------------

Before you can run up the application, you need some databases to
be created within MySQL/MariaDB.  A script is provided to assist
in setting these up.  Under the scheduler directory it will be
found as:

  support/setupmysql

Edit the script and you will see two environment variables to set.

::

  DATABASE_PREFIX="not set"
  DATABASE_PASSWORD="not set"

The prefix which you use will depend on your database, but if this
is a new system just for running Scheduler then an obvious one to
use would be just "scheduler".  The password is up to you - make it
something secure.  Then run the script with

::

  $ support/setupmysql

You will be prompted for the MySQL root password which you set up
earlier when installing MySQL.

Edit the file:

  config/database.yml

and set the password there to the same as you chose to put in the
DATABASE_PASSWORD variable.

You can then create the database tables and give them some initial
sample data with the following commands.

::

  $ rake db:schema:load
  $ rake db:seed


Run it
------

And now you should be in a position to run up the application in
demonstration mode with the following command:

::

  $ rails s

Point a web browser to http://<your host>:3000 and you should see
the Scheduler demonstration site.  The application is running in development
mode with a copy of the data used on the demonstration site.

.. note::

  As of Rails 4.2, if you invoke the server in this way it will listen
  on only 127.0.0.1:3000, which means it can be accessed only from
  that machine.  Assuming you're doing all this work on some kind of
  headless server, that isn't terribly useful.  Use the following
  command to have it listen on all interfaces:

  ::

    $ rails s -b 0.0.0.0


You can log in as one of the two demonstration users using the menu
at the top right.
